In this lecture, we're going to continue
the
data analysis example that we started in
part one.
If you recall, we, we laid down, kind of a
list of
te, of steps that generally one might take
when doing a data analysis.
And previously we talked about the first
roughly half of these steps.
And in this lecture, we're going to talk
about the remaining half.
So this includes exploratory data
analysis, statistical
prediction and modeling, interpretation,
challenging your results, synthesizing
and writing up the results, and creating
reproducible code.
So if you recall, the basic question was,
can
I automatically detect emails that are
SPAM or not?
And a more slightly, more concrete version
of this
question that can be used to translate
into a Cisco
problem was, you know, can I use
quantitative characteristics
of the emails to classify them as SPAM or
HAM?
So, our data set, again, was, from
this, UCI machine, Learning Repository,
which had already
been cleaned up, and it was available in
the, current lab package as a data set.
So this data set had 4,600, observations,
or emails,
that had been kind of characterized along
58 different variables.
so, the first thing that we need to do
with this data set if
we want to build a model to kind of,
classify emails into spam or not.
Is that we need to split the data set into
test set and a training set.
So the idea is that we're going to use
part of the test
of the data set to build our model, and
then we're going to
use another part of the data set which is
independent of the first
part to actually determine how good our
model is kind of making a prediction.
So here I'm
a taking a random half of the data set, so
I'm using, I'm flipping a coin with the
rbinom function, to
generate a random kind of coin flip with
probability of
half so that'll separate the the data set
into two pieces.
So you can see that roughly 2000, so 2314
are going
to be one half and 2287 will be in the
other half.
And so the training set will be, will be,
one set and
the test set will be another set of data.
So the first thing we're going to want to
do is a little bit of exploratory data
analysis.
We have not looked at this data set yet.
And so it would be useful to look at kind
of what are the, what data, what did the
data
look like, what's the distribution of the
data, you know
what what are the relationships between
the variables, things like that.
So we want to look at basic summaries one
dimensional, two dimensional summaries of
the data we want to
check for is there are any missing data,
you
know why is there missing data, if there
is create
some exploratory plots and do a little
kind of exploratory analyses.
So so if we look at the training data
sets,
so that's what we're going to focus on
right now as
we do our exploratory analysis, as we
build our model,
all that's going to be done in the
training data set.
And if you look at the, the column names
of the dataset, you can see that they're
all just words essentially and and if you
look
at the first five rows, we can see that
basically that these are the frequencies
at which they occur in a given email.
So you can see, you can see the work make
does not appear in
that first email and, and the word mail
does not appear, so things like that.
So these are all basically frequency
counts, or
frequencies of, of words within each of
the emails.
So if we look at the training data set,
and look at the outcome
we see that 906 of, of the emails are
spam, are classified as spam.
And the other 1381 are classified as
non-spam.
So these, this is what we're going to use
to
kind of build our model for predicting the
spam emails.
We can make some plots and we can compare,
you know, so what are
the frequen, the frequencies of certain
characteristics
between the spam and the non spam emails.
So, here we're looking at a variable
called capital ave.
So the average number of capital letters.
And, you can see that its difficult to
look
at this picture, because the data are
highly skewed.
And so, in these kinds of situations it's
often useful to
just kind of look at the log
transformation of the variable.
So, here I'm going to to take the base ten
log of the data
set, or, I'm sorry, the variable, and
compare them to spam and nonspam.
And since there are a lot of zeros in
this particular variable, taking the log
of zero doesn't
really make sense.
So we'll just add 1 to that variable, just
so we can take the
log and kind of get a rough sense of what
the data look like.
Typically, you don't, you wouldn't want to
just add 1 to a variable just because.
But since we're just exploring the data,
a, like, making, kind
of, exploratory plots, it's okay to do
that in this case.
So here you can see, rather obviously,
that, the
spam emails have a much higher rate of
these,
capital letters, than the non spam emails,
and of course, if
you've ever seen spam emails, you're
probably familiar with that phenomenon.
And so that's one useful, relationship to
see there.
We can look at pairwise relationships
between the different variables in the
plots.
And here I, I've got a pairs plot of a few
of the
variables, and as this is the log
transformation of each of the variables.
And you can see that some of them are
correlated,
some of them are not particularly
correlated, and so that's useful to know.
So we can explore the predictors space a
little bit more by doing a hierarchical
cluster analysis
and so this is a first cut at trying to do
that with the hclust function in R.
And you can see I plotted the Dendrogram
just to, to see kind
of how what, what predictors or what
words or characteristics tend to cluster
together.
And it's not particularly helpful at this
point although
it does separate out this one variable
capital total.
But if you recall that the clustering
algorithms can
be sensitive to any skewness in the
distribution of the individual variables.
So it may be useful to redo the
clustering analysis after a transformation
of the predictor space.
So here I've taken a log, a base 10 log
transformation of the fifth, of the
predictors in the training
data set, and again, I've added one to
each one,
just so, to make, to avoid taking the log
of zero.
And now you can see it's a little bit more
interesting,
the dendrogram that is, it's separated out
a few clusters wi-,
this capital average is one kind of
cluster all by itself.
There's another cluster that cludes, that
includes you will or your.
And then there are a bunch of other
words that kind of lump more ambiguously
together.
And so this may be something worth
exploring a little bit
further if you see some particular kind of
characteristics that are interesting.
So once we've done exploratory data
analysis, we've looked
at some univariate and bivariate plots, we
did a
little cluster analysis, we we can move on
to
doing a more sophisticated statistical
model and some prediction modeling.
And so any statistical modeling that you
engage in should be informed by you know,
kind of question that you're interested
in, of
course, and the results of any exploratory
analysis.
The exact methods that you employ will
depend
on, you know, the question of interest.
And when you do a statistical model, you
should account for the fact that
the data have been processed or
transformed
if they have, in fact, been so.
And when you, as you do statistical
modeling, you should always think about,
what
are the measures of uncertainty, what are
the sources of uncertainty in your data
set.
So here we're going to just do a very
basic statistical model.
What we're going to do is we're going
to go through each of the variables in the
data
set and try to fit a generalizing model,
in this case
a logistic regression, to see if we can
predict an
email is spam or not by using just a
single variable.
So here using the reformulate function to
create a formula that
includes the response, which is just the
type, type of email.
And one of the variables of the data set,
and we're just going to cycle through
all the variables in this data set using
this for-loop to build a logistic
regression model.
and, and then subsequently calculate the
cross validated error
rate of predicting spam emails from a
single, variable.
And so, if you run this loop in R, it may
take a little bit to
run, it won't, but if it has to
loop through all the variables,
[INAUDIBLE] all the models.
So, once we've done this, we're going to
try
to figure out, well, which of the
individual variables,
has the minimum cross validated error
rate.
And so we can just go, and you can take
this vector of
results this CV error, and just figure out
which one is the minimum.
And it turns out that the, the predictor
that has the
minimum cross validated error rate is this
variable called char dollar.
This is an indicator of the number of
dollar signs in the email.
So, just keep in mind this is a very
simple model.
Each of these models that we fit only have
a single
predictor in it.
So of course we could maybe think of
something
more complicated, but this maybe an
interesting place to start.
So, if we take this best model from this
set of 55 predictors,
this, this char dollar variable and I'll
just re-fit the model again right here.
And so this is a logistic regression
model.
We can actually make predictions now from
the model on the test data recall that we
split the data set into two parts and
built the training model on the training
data set.
And so now we're going to predict the
outcome on
the test data set to see how well we do.
And so, in a logistic regression we don't
get
we don't get specific predictions out of
you know 0
1 classifications of each of the messages
we get a
probability that a message is going to be
spam or not.
And so then we have to take this
continuous probability, which ranges
between 0 and 1,
and, and determine at what point, at what
cutoff, do we think that the email is
spam.
And so we're, we're just going to draw the
cut off here at 0.5,
so if the probability is above 50%, we're
just going to call it a spam email.
So once we've created our classification,
we can take a
look at the predicted values for, from our
model, and then
compare them with the actual values from
the test data set,
because we know what, which was spam, and
which was not.
And here's the classification table that
we get
from the predicted and the the real
values.
And we can, so we can just calculate the
error rate.
And so the, the mistakes that we made are
on the off diagonal
elements of this table, so 61 and 458.
So, 61 were classified as spam, that were
not actually spam, and 458 were classify
as non spam but actually were spam.
So we calculate this error rate as about
22%.
So, now that we've done the analysis,
we've calculated some results.
We've calculated our kind of our best
model.
We've looked at the error rate that's
produced
by that model.
So now we need to interpret our findings
and it's
important when you interpret your findings
to use appropriate language.
And to not be to not use language
that goes beyond the analysis that you
actually did.
And so you want to give kind of, if you're
in this type
of application where we're just looking at
some data, we're building a predictive
model.
You want to use works like, you know,
prediction or it correlates with
or, or, or certain variables may be
associated with the outcome or
the analysis is descriptive, and so and so
just to think
about carefully what kind of language you
use to interpret your results.
it's, it's good to give an explanation, so
if
you can think of, you know, why certain
models predict
better than others, it would be useful to
kind
of give an explanation of what you think
that is.
If there are coefficients in the model
that you
need to interpret it's useful, you can do
that here.
And in particular it's useful to
bring in measures of uncertainty, to kind
of calibrate your interpretation of the
final results.
So, in this example, we might think, you
know,
that you might think of, of stating that,
you
know, the fraction of characters that are
dollar signs,
can be used to predict if an email spam.
Maybe we decide that anything more, with
more
than 6.6% dollar signs is classified as
spam.
More dollar signs always
means more spam under our prediction
model.
And, and in our for our model in the test
data set, the error rate was 22.4%.
So, once you've done your analysis and
you've developed your interpretation,
it's important that you, yourself,
challenge
all the results that you've found.
Because if you don't do it, someone else
is going to do it once they see your
analysis, and so you might as well get one
step ahead of everyone by doing it
yourself first.
And so it's good to challenge everything,
every, the
whole process by which you gone through
this problem.
The question itself is that, is the
question even a
valid question to ask where the data came
from, how
you got the data, how you processed the
data, how
you did the analysis and any conclusions
that you drew.
If you have measures of uncertainty,
are those the appropriate measure of
uncertainty.
And if you built models, you know
why is your model the best model?
Why is it an appropriate model for this
problem?
How do you choose the things to include in
your model?
So all these things are questions that you
should ask yourself and should have a
reasonable answer to so that when someone
else asks you, you can respond in kind.
And also it's useful to think potential
alternative analyses
that, you know, might be useful it doesn't
mean
that you have to do those alternative
analyses, in
the sense that you might stick to your
original
just because other reasons.
But it may be useful to try alternative
analyses just in case
they may be useful in different ways or
may produce better predictions.
Once you've interpreted your results,
you've done the
analysis, you've interpreted your results,
you've drawn some
conclusions, you've challenged all your
findings you're going to
need to synthesize the results and write
them up.
So synthesis is very important because
typically in any data analysis,
there are going to be many, many, many
things that you did.
And when you present them to a, another
person or to a group you're going to
want to have to winnow it down to the kind
of most important aspects and to, to,
to tell a coherent story.
And so typically you want to lead with the
question that you were trying to address.
If people understand the question then
they can
make, they can draw up a context in
their mind, and understand, kind of have a
better understanding of the framework in
which you're operating.
And so that will lead to what kinds of
data are necessary, are
are, are appropriate for this question
what kinds of analyses would be
appropriate.
So you can summarize the analyses
as you're telling the story.
It's important that you don't include
every analysis that you ever did
but only if its needed for kind of telling
a coherent story.
It's useful to sometimes keep these
analyses in your back pocket though, even
if you don't talk about it, because
someone may challenge what you've done
and it's useful to say well you know we
did do that analysis
but, it was problematic you know because
of whatever the reason may be.
It's important to order the analysis
that you did according to the story that
you're telling and often that order
is not the same as the order in which you
actually did the analysis.
So, it's usually not that useful to talk
about the analysis that
you did kind of chronologically, or the
order in which you did
them, because the order in which you did
them is often very
scattered and and and not, and kind of
doesn't make sense in retrospect.
So talk about the analyses in your, of
your data set in the order that,
that's appropriate for the story you're
trying to tell.
And when your telling the story or you're
presenting to
someone or to your group it's, it's useful
to include kind
of very well done figures so that people
can kind of
understand what you're trying to say in
one picture or two.
So, in our example, the basic question was
you know, can we
use quantitative characteristics of the
emails to classify them as spam or ham.
Our approach was you know rather than try
to
get the ideal data set from all Google
servers as
we collected some data from the UCI
machine learning repository
and created training and test sets from
this data set.
We explored some relationships between the
various predictors.
We decided to use a logistic regression
model on the training set and chose our
kind of single variable predictor by using
cross validation when we applied this
model to
the test set it was 78% ac-, accurate.
So it, the interpretation of our results
was that basically, more dollar signs
seemed
to indicate an email was more likely to be
a spam, and this seems reasonable.
We've all seen emails with you know,
lots of dollar signs in them trying to
sell you something.
And so this is kind of both reasonable and
understandable.
Of course, the results were not
particularly great as 78% test
set accuracy is not that good for most
prediction types of algorithms.
That we probably could do much better if
we
included more variables or if we did or we
included
a more sophisticated model, maybe a
non-linear model and
for example is not, why did we use
logistic regression?
We could have used a much more
sophisticated type of modeling approach.
But anyway these are the kinds of things
that you want to outline to
people as you go through data analysis,
and you present it to other people.
So finally, the, the thing that you want
to make sure of
is that you, is that you document your
analysis as you go.
You can use things like tools like R
Markdown and Knitter and
R Studio to kind of document your analyses
as you do them.
And so you can preserve the R code
as well as any kind of a written summary
of your analysis in a single document
using Knitter.
And so then, and so to make sure that
all of what you do is reproducible by
either yourself
or by other people because ultimately
that's the standard by
which most kind of, big data analysis will
be judged.
If someone can not reproduce it then the
conclusions that
you draw will be, will be you know not as
worth,
as worthy as one analysis where the
results are reproducible.
So try to stay organized.
Try to kind of, use the tools
reproducible research to keep things
organized and reproducible.
And and so ,and that will make
your evidence for your conclusions much
more powerful.